Introduction
This is the start of a short series of articles on the data science method. They are
designed, specifically, to complement Springboard’s Data Science Career Track course.
Writing about the method is a hard task, because there is no such single thing as the
data science method. What I mean is that there is no process you can robotically follow
that is guaranteed to yield ideal results. There are, however, guiding principles that will
steer you in the right direction. Think of them together, if you will, as forming a North
Star for you to follow.

CRISP-DM
A worthy industry standard process is the cross-industry process for data mining
(CRISP-DM). There are many articles describing this process, so I won’t go into it in
detail here. Broadly, CRISP-DM recognizes some six stages:
1. Business understanding
2. Data understanding
3. Data preparation
4. Modelling
5. Evaluation
6. Deployment
Business understanding
Yes, we want to gain a clear understanding of the business context. How else could we
know what problem we’re really tackling and what a usable solution might look like?
Data understanding
Yes, we want to understand the data. Does it seem useful for addressing the business
problem? Do we trust it (or can we ring fence our concerns over it, at least)?
Data preparation
We will inevitably need to prepare the data, because data are rarely gathered for the
purpose of any analysis or the convenience of the data scientist.
Modelling
After all that, we can finally move on to the more interesting modelling stage. This
does not necessarily mean machine learning! It may be sufficient to gain a thorough
understanding of certain relationships within the data; that alone may be the end goal
of “modelling” for a project. Yes, often it will involve machine learning, but a vital
precursor to any machine learning work is generating insight into patterns in the data
via exploratory data analysis.
Evaluation
Then we want to evaluate how good our understanding, or our model, is. Is it good
enough to meet the needs of the business? Are we confident enough to present some
clear conclusions? Does a model offer an advantage over the previous solution?
Deployment
If our data product is good enough, then we’ll want to “deploy” it. In some cases,
deploying the product may mean passing on the knowledge gained. This needs to get
to the appropriate recipient in an appropriately digestible format. In other cases,
deployment may mean passing a machine learning model into a production process
where it will generate predictions that drive autonomous business processes.
Springboard’s Data Science Method
But if there are already industry standard processes for doing data science, why define
a new one? Well, to start with, CRISP-DM is not the only game in town for data science
project management. And, as this Smart Vision article highlights, CRISP-DM
is an idealised sequence of events. In practice many of the tasks can be performed in a
dif erent order and it will often be necessary to backtrack to previous tasks and repeat certain
actions. The model does not try to capture all possible routes through the data mining
process.
This can present substantial challenges to entrants to the data science field, not to
mention teachers. Do you always start at the same point? When do you backtrack? How
far do you backtrack? How many times do you iterate until you declare the entire
endeavour “done”?
With this in mind, we can strip the process down to a more linear path that largely
ducks the nuances of an iterative back and forth workflow but still keeps faith with the
scientific method. We’ll just point out here that you should be constantly re-evaluating
your assumptions and never be afraid to revisit earlier steps in light of lessons learned.
And so here we outline a sequence that inevitably makes some assumptions and
simplifications, but a sequence that you, with experience, will be able to build upon
and bend to your needs.
1. Problem identification
2. Data wrangling
3. Exploratory data analysis
4. Pre-processing and training data
5. Modelling
6. Documentation
Hopefully you will see a broad agreement of the above with the six CRISP-DM steps. As
we’ve discussed, the real process inevitably involves cycles of iteration. Much of the
differences between these steps and those of CRISP-DM lie in where you apply the cuts
in the process and how you label them.
Problem identification
You want to adequately identify the real problem to be solved, otherwise you’re
heading off in the wrong direction from the start! This is a direct correspondence with
the CRISP-DM step.
Data wrangling
Data wrangling is a broad term that easily covers the acquisition and any initial
bashing of data into shape, as well as the ongoing transformations of the data to suit.
To understand the data, you do first need to acquire it, quite likely wresting it from
some original source or sources. This step crosses the boundaries of CRISP-DM’s data
understanding and data preparation. Indeed, data wrangling is arguably an activity that
persists throughout the entire process.
Exploratory data analysis
This has a strong connection to CRISP-DM’s data understanding step. We put it here
because you generally have to wrangle data to really explore it and, thus, understand it.
Pre-processing and training data
Pre-processing and training data development can also be regarded as part of data
preparation but yet also form an aspect of modelling. Because the pre-processing can be
so inextricably linked to the modelling, there’s inevitably considerable crossover here
with the CRISP-DM modelling step.
Modelling
CRISP-DM has evaluation as a distinct step, but it is arguably an implicit part of any
model development effort.
Documentation
Finally, CRISP-DM has deployment as the ultimate step. Here we focus on
documentation as a deployment artifact. An entire course curriculum can be dedicated
to putting machine learning models into production…